Welcome to Cinema Summary,
ladies and gentlemen,
and today I'm gonna level with you, this is gonna
be the mother of explanations for VIVARIUM
because I'm gonna explain everything:
What's the language, who's in control of Yonder
Why does the kid mimic the parents,
the significance of the number 9,
The relevance to the cuckoo bird, who the
other people Gemma saw were and more
because as much as this movie has some
good performances, a great premise, and a great start
it doesn't deliver a good payoff.
So that's where I come in
and just FYI I'll be going through a
summary first so spoilers ahead
if you just want to skip ahead
to the explanation
a timecode should appear on screen now.
Now without further ado this is VIVARIUM (2020)
Gemma is a young schoolteacher
and she clearly loves her job
she brightens up and gets very animated with her kids
but she's much less enthusiastic
about looking for a new home
it's dragging on and on.
But her co-worker convinces her to take
her advice and close a deal fast
The housing market is going through the roof
Yeah, we're gonna *Sounds of birds chirping*
and do you hear that?
It's subtle but-
Yeah, we're gonna drop *Sounds of bird chirping*
A chirp. Huh.
After school ends, Gemma runs into a student
who finds a dead baby bird on the ground
Gemma tells the girl that a cuckoo bird
probably kicked this hatchling from its nest
Ah yes, the cuckoo bird!
A vicious little thing that will kick out baby birds
from their nests to put its own eggs in
Yeah, you heard that right!
It tricks other birds into raising its own hatchlings.
Sounds ridiculous but it's true!
And keep this in mind because it comes into play later.
Gemma just accepts this shocking cruel reality.
Well, it's just nature. It's just how things are!
But the girl does not take this well it tells Gemma
"I don't like nature. I don't like
how things are! It's horrible."
Gemma then meets up with her husband Tom
who actually does care enough about the
baby bird to bury it and even do a little ceremony
unlike his wife.
Before the two of them leave to meet
a real estate agent named Martin
who is dressed like a Mormon and is just..
So weird
Like there's this scene where he gives
this wide-open mouthed smile and
the camera cuts away from him to Gemma
then to Martin's name tag,
then to Tom,
then back to Martin who is still
holding that smile!
Yikes!
This film has so many scenes that
are so off-putting like this. It's great!
Anyway, Martin tells them about
this special place called Yonder.
it's a really popular suburb with people
snatching up properties there really quickly
A suburb it isn't what Tom and Gemma are looking for
and Tom feels something's off
and tells Martin they can't go
because they don't have a car
but he's cut off by Gemma who's
hooked by Martin saying that the homes
may not be available for much longer
and Tom gives in.
So the couple follow Martin to the Yonder
development and this place is creepy
with the tagline "forever quality homes"
All the houses look exactly the same in
this awful shade  of green on the outside
and as if that wasn't bad enough
same color on the inside too.
Martin seems to love it though.
He shows them House Number 9
and calls it a "forever home"
that's "perfect for any family"
and then in the middle of the tour,
Martin just leaves the house
Gemma's surprised and Tom's like
"Good! Let's get the F out of here!"
but they can't
every time they drive around the block
they end up at House Number 9
again and again until night falls and
their car runs out of gas.
The next day, Tom climbs the roof
to see if there's a way out
but all he sees are rows of houses that go on for miles.
Tom and Gemma desperately try to
walk their out but there's no exit!
So they go back home, tired and defeated,
where they find a box with food
and things needed for survival.
Out of anger, Tom sets the house on fire
hoping to send a smoke signal to anyone but the
next day, they find the house has been
rebuilt as well as a box with a baby
inside with the text on the box reading
"Raise the child and be released".
Two months later...
2 months later, the baby has grown up very quickly
becoming a very
– let me say that again –
VERY annoying child
who is very needy and creepy
like he's always watching his parents and
copying them which is normal for any kid
but the way he does it and his
voice is just so unsettling
like he imitates both of them
having a full-blown argument
and when he does Tom he does a lower voice
and for Gemma he uses a higher pitch one
"If you didn't say no to every goddamn house we
looked at we wouldn't have ended up here!"
"So I'm to blame Tom? How is this my fault!?"
Plus there's the way he's dressed which
is very similar to Martin's outfit and
when he's not being freaky or annoying
he's watching this trippy TV screensaver
or acting like Tom and Gemma are
his parents which they absolutely hate
and remind him that "I am not your mother".
After a tossed cigarette lands on the front lawn
Tom finds out that the soil is fake and
begins digging a hole
becoming obsessed with it,
digging deeper and deeper into the unnatural earth.
But one day, Tom gets fed up with
the kid and locks him inside the car
telling Gemma to leave the boy
alone and let him starve to death!
but she saves his life and grows closer with him
and again: Tom doesn't stick to his conviction.
Gemma is growing closer to the child and
begins acting like a mother
teaching him things, playing with him.
We see more of this: Tom gets made at
the kid for watching TV at night
which he turns off but Gemma
gives in and allows it
and he does nothing.
These dynamics – Gemma taking the kid as her own child and Tom giving in– are very important
But one day, the boy goes missing
and Gemma has no idea where he is
whereas Tom doesn't care..
Tom's pretty much completely on his own
outside, digging mostly and
hearing sounds "down there".
When the boy comes back, he has a book
written in a strange language with weird
diagrams, similar to the TV's screen saver weirdness.
Curious, Gemma asks him what he was doing
and he tells her that he met someone
but is not allowed to say who.
So, Gemma tricks him into
acting  like the person he met
by playing a game of pretend with him
and the boy obeys.
Transforming in front of her eyes
while making these weird chirping noises
pretending to be who he met!
It's a terrifying moment for Gemma
and it really makes you wonder what
exactly is the boy and who did he meet?
Several months later, and the boy  is now a man.
The man leaves the home every day to go somewhere
to do something unknown.
One day, Tom digs up a dead body inside of a bag
and horrified, he climbs out of the hole but
begins dying from exhaustion and malnutrition
The boy comes back home, and like it's nothing,
bags Tom's body, and throws down the hole
ironically Tom ended up
digging his own grave
Gemma is furious and explodes in anger!
Attacking the man who used to be a boy
but he somehow lives up the sidewalk
and goes underneath to escape
Gemma tries to chase him but
she ends up horrifyingly,
clipping and sinking and falling through walls!
Going through weird versions of
different colored houses
In each house, there are different
couples who are raising their own boys
eventually she pops out of
her own House Number 9
here she's found weak and dying by the former boy
Who puts her in a bag which he throws down the hole
but just before he does she has
some last words for him
I said I'm not your F-ing mother
then after filling the hole
and cleaning up the house
the boy leaves Yonder in Gemma's car
going to the real estate agency where
he meets a now waay older Martin
who dies on the spot!
The boy then puts Martin's body in
a bag that he gets from a cabinet
though not before putting Martin's name tag on
clipping a receipt on the body and... yeah...
rolls it up like play-doh and puts it away in that cabinet
the boy now becoming a
new real estate agent
and welcomes in a new couple
So with all that said what does it all mean?
The entire film is based on that first
scene with the little girl.
The entire thing is a critique, like she said
"I don't like nature. I don't  like
how things are, it's horrible!"
and the way that it does that is genius
using daily cuckoo bird.
throughout the film at key points we hear birds chirping
like in Gemma's classroom or when
her co-worker says the markets are
going through the roof, when Tom and
Gemma are in the car, and so on.
all the criticisms this film has are pointed out using
a different aspect of the cuckoo bird itself
It's layer upon layer of cuckoo
metaphors and it does so masterfully
Let me explain
First, the film criticizes Gemma. Gemma is flawed
She lets others dictate her life: a co-worker entices her
with the fear of missing out
before house prices go up.
Martin reels her in into looking at
a suburb house she doesn't want
because it might not be available
much longer and so on.
The only one who doesn't use this
tactic with her, actually, is Tom.
He's the only one in her life
genuinely giving her good advice
and she ignores it, just like in that opening scene:
she can't see what's wrong with a situation.
That's just nature. That's  just how things are.
The cuckoo is used to point out that Gemma
can't see what's wrong with a
situation including her own.
And then it goes one layer deeper
because then the cuckoo situation is forced on her.
All of a sudden, now she's taking
care of another's offspring.
What better way to make someone
realize the horribleness of a situation
then by forcing them to live it.
She too is completely hooked by the child
who takes advantage of her
and plays on her maternal instincts by
mimicking her and needing her nurturing.
Just like her coworker and Martin take advantage of her fear of missing out and peer pressure instincts
and it works
for a time.
Because actually Gemma isn't all bad
we do see her briefly shaking her head
after the housing price conversation
and she does, at first, resist the kid
but really by the end of the movie,
Gemma comes full circle.
Eventually the situation gets so bad
so horrible even she can see it
she snaps when Tom dies, and with her last
dying breath, as the former boy zips her
body bag: We can see she sees and
understands what the cuckoo has done
"I'm not your effing mum."
Perhaps she even finally  understood
what the boy himself has become:
A full-grown cuckoo ready to
take the role of Martin
and entrap another couple with his offspring.
In her last moment she has
overcome the dictates of others
Secondly, we have Tom.
Tom actually does seem to care for the baby bird
that was ejected from its nest
as we see him burying it.
He doesn't have Gemma's problem:
He's okay with not seeing the place,
Never gets enticed by the kid
and generally has good ideas
and is right about almost everything!
I mean, yeah!
How about we don't go to the place this really creepy
real estate agent is trying to set us up with?
But Tom's got a different problem
and here the cuckoo analogy
plays a different role.
Tom is a cuck
A cuckold. Derived, you guessed
it, from the word cuckoo.
A cuckold is someone who
let's other walk all over them.
This is again the critique of the girl
who doesn't accept how things are
You can have all the right answers in the world
but if you don't have the
conviction to stand by them.
What is going to change?
Nothing.
He might try to turn off the TV
or tell Gemma to let the boy die
but he always gives in.
They go see the place, Gemma lets
the boy out of the locked car
the two grow close and the TV stays on
and Tom himself is the one ejected from the nest
Alone
Outside
Digging a hole
in which he is eventually buried
just like the baby bird which was kicked
out by the cuckoo and that he to buried
but we are not done.
What in the world is going on in Yonder?
Who made it?
What's the purpose of it?
Why Number 9?
What did the trippy TV and language mean?
and who did the boy meet?
Let's take a look at a few hints
When Tom flicks his cigarette
onto the grass, it doesn't burn it.
It has this weird distortion sound
effect and the grass just recedes.
Furthermore, when Tom goes digging
we see that it's artificial with no subsoil or roots.
Other similarly weird things are
that all the houses and clouds
seem like they're all the same, repeating pattern
and there's also the weirdness of the former
boy being able to go under the sidewalk
and Gemma clipping through the walls.
That's all because, according to my theory,
they are in a simulation, and in my opinion
Specifically a gaming simulation although
I'll talk about another option later.
Sim games are a genre of gaming
that includes a huge amount of titles .
All the way from The Sims, Sim
City, and Rollercoaster Tycoon,
to Farming Simulator to arguably,
Minecraft and Ark: Survival Evolved.
Simulation games are meant
to imitate a real-world activity
but obviously they can't
be a perfect one-to-one copy
due to processing limitations they often
have to make very specific compromises.
For example, using just one 3D model of a
house and repeating it again and again
Or one 3D model of a cloud,
repeating it again and again
Or or example. using simple low
res effects for grass burning
instead of the real looking thing
and maybe not bothering with
designing roots or proper subsoil
Games very often reduce the resolution drastically
in areas they don't expect
the player to get to
Out of bound areas.
Which explains why Tom started to see
the dirt come in small clumps
When he got deeper in the hole
and that explains different mechanics
like the house popping back up
after being burned down,
their trash disappearing,
and the food they need appearing regularly
As for Gemma moving through
walls that looks exactly like
some sort of accidental clipping bug
probably triggered by her entering a
non-player area by chasing the man
and the other people she sees?
Other save files
played by other players.
Maybe this game is very popular
with so many wanting to
escape the pressures of their lives
not only can we tell from the different
colors of the houses that Gemma sees
that there are many other neighborhoods
going on at the same time
but from the fact that Martin's car
at the beginning of the movie is different
from the former boy's car which
he steals from Gemma at the end.
We can tell it continues happening
to different people every time .
Not just the same ones again and again
As I said simulation games are
meant to imitate a real-world activity
but yet at the same time, they are so popular because
they allow players to escape their own reality.
This too is a criticism of the
movie in my opinion.
Players of simulation games get to enjoy
the good aspects of the activities
without the bad aspects such as stress or
injury that can come from the real thing.
It's not criticizing those players
but it's criticizing people trying
to do that in their real lives
trying to live without anxiety or risk.
Conforming to the needs and wants of society
like getting a house and raising a kid
without thinking for themselves
and being willing to take chances.
The movie points out the extreme
version of how monotonous and empty
it is for you let others tell you how to live.
By literally use the example of
someone dictating to you how to live
The Player dictating the real-world life
of a character in a sim game.
There is a limit to how much you can escape
at some point you still need to rise up in your own life
and face challenges otherwise people suffer.
Baby hatchlings get kicked out of nests
and who knows!
Maybe it's actually the NPC's in your game
You assumed were subconscious
but we're actually living the horror of Tom and Gemma.
In which case, I must actually be worse than Hitler
but that's probably taking
the analogy too far
This is again the criticism of the little girl who sees
something wrong and isn't okay with it;
Suffering.
But is faced with Gemma as
a jaded adult who is okay with it
So who's doing all this to them?
In my opinion: the player
the third person this movie is criticizing: Us.
That  is also who the boy meets
in my opinion and why he can't say
He's part of it. A part of the program
and he can't break the game's rules
The TV and the strange language in the book
Those are all coda Ex-Ah-Cute-Tables:
Ones-and-zeroes. gibberish to
anyone other than a machine
This is why the boy becomes capable of
breaking the physics engine's rules
and escape by going underneath the pavement
His program has admin privileges.
As for the Number 9
I think this is more of a reference,
above anything else.
Either to a British TV called Inside No. 9
in which easy story took place in a
building with the number 9 on it
Or more likely to the nine stages of life
Prenatal Development
Infancy and toddlerhood,
Early childhood
Middle childhood
Adolescence
Early adulthood
Middle adulthood
Late adulthood
Death and dying.
With the boy going through all
of these stages fairly quickly
and this process of boys
growing up, implied to be a cycle.
So that's my explanation
The cuckoo bird metaphor is used to
criticize Gemma's indifference,
Tom's inaction
and our society's thoughtlessness
In other words:
A lack of care
A lack of action
and a like a thought.
There are a few other possibilities.
The language can be an alien language
Especially the kind of alien that evolved on their world
In a similar parasitic way to the way
the cuckoo bird evolved in ours
and that explains the voice chirping
when imitating who he saw
and that species is using our society to
raise its offspring in the same way.
By creating a cheap knockoff
simulation of our world
while we do its bidding
Who knows!
Maybe, Martin gassed Tom and
Gemma as soon as they entered his office
and their brains are actually hooked
up on a mothership somewhere
So the boy can learn to imitate them
but in my opinion aliens can be too easy
of a catch-all explanation sometimes
I really want to hear if anyone else has other theories like this or
can explain the alien theory
or my theory a bit deeper
Please feel free to comment with your opinion.
Making these videos and theorizing is
something I really enjoy doing but
usually it's even more fun to jump into
the comments and see the theories
evolve after the video is published
So that being said thank you so much
for watching ladies and gentlemen
if you enjoyed the video
leave a like down below
and subscribe to get updated on my latest uploads
Until next time folks! I
Wait. Do you hear?
Sounds like...
*Cuckoo cuckoos*